[BD-24][TNL-7919] LTI Advantage Names and Roles provisioning service implementation direction (#142)
edx/xblock-lti-consumer: docs/decisions/0004-lti-advantage-nrps.rst

        "context": {
            "id": "2923-abc",
            "label": "CPS 435",
            "title": "CPS 435 Learning Analytics",
        },
        "members" : [
            {
                "status" : "Active",
                "name": "Jane Q. Public",
                "picture" : "https://platform.example.edu/jane.jpg",
                "given_name" : "Jane",
                "family_name" : "Doe",
                "middle_name" : "Marie",
                "email": "jane@platform.example.edu",
                "user_id" : "0ae836b9-7fc9-4060-006f-27b2066ac545",
                "lis_person_sourcedid": "59254-6782-12ab",
                "roles": [
                    "http://purl.imsglobal.org/vocab/lis/v2/membership#Instructor"
                ]
            }
        ]
    }

Where the only required fields for each member are :code:`user_id` and :code:`roles`, to avoid unintended PII transmission to a third party.
But since one of the purposes of this API is to enable tools access to user PII, the implementation should provide a flag to enable the consumer
to pass additional PII parameters such as name, email, and a profile picture url.

> The main issue with enabling this API (`even with pagination as defined in the spec`_) is that it would allow tools to scrape enrollments for all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main issue with enabling this API (`even with pagination as defined in the spec`_) is that it would allow external third-party tools to scrape enrollments for all
```

students in a given course. Given the scale of some courses in edX.org, even if the API is made more performant with cursor pagination,
we're still left with an API pattern that would be actively encouraging clients out there to make hundreds of thousands of successive requests in order
to crawl enrollment data.

> .. _`Names and Roles Provisioning Services (NRPS)`: http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0
> .. _`even with pagination as defined in the spec`: http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0#limit-query-parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _Names and Roles Provisioning Services (NRPS): http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0
.. _even with pagination as defined in the spec: http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0#limit-query-parameter
```

Decision
========

Implement the LTI NRPS for courses up to a predefined (and configurable) number of active enrollments.
Above that number, the service endpoint will return HTTP status 403 (Forbidden).

This is the simplest implementation that allows us to provide the LTI NRPS service and mitigate the concerns mentioned above.
The NRPS services availability and behavior will be controlled by the following toggles:

.. list-table::
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Toggle name
     - Type
     - Behavior
   * - LTI_NRPS_ENABLED
     - Feature flag
     - Enables and disables LTI NRPS globally in the Open edX instance. Is disabled by default.
   * - LTI_NRPS_ACTIVE_ENROLLMENT_LIMIT
     - Django setting

>      - Controls the allowed number of active enrollments allowed where the API is still available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Controls the allowed number of active enrollments when the API is enabled.
```

       Defaults to 1000 active enrollments at first.
   * - LTI_NRPS_TRANSMIT_PII
     - CourseWaffleFlag
     - Allows the tool to access student and instructor PII (username, email, full name, profile picture).
       Defaults to False.

Consequences
============

* Small courses will be able to use LTI NRPS endpoints on their tools, up to a limited amount of users.

> * Big MOOCs (with millions of users) won't be able to scrape enrollment data on edX and potentially cause stability issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Big MOOCs (with millions of users) won't won't allow scraping of enrollment data on edX and potentially cause stability issues.
```

> *

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

LTI Advantage NRPS (Names and Roles provisioning services)
----------------------------------------------------------

Status
======

In Review

Context
=======

> One of the LTI Advantage services if the `Names and Roles Provisioning Services (NRPS)`_, which allows LTI tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the LTI Advantage services is the `Names and Roles Provisioning Services (NRPS)`_, which allows LTI tools
```

to retrieve a user list associated with the learning context and internally provision resources for them.

From the LTI-NRPS Specification:

    The Names and Role Provisioning Services is based on IMS Learning Information Services (LIS) [LIS-20]
    and W3C Organization Ontology [W3C-ORG]. It is concerned with providing access to data about users’ roles
    within organizations, a course being an example of an organization. So a very common purpose for this service
    is to provide a roster (list of enrolments) for a course.

The LTI-NRPS services has two services which provide user data in the following format:

> .. code-block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: json
```

But since one of the purposes of this API is to enable tools access to user PII, the implementation should provide a flag to enable the consumer
to pass additional PII parameters such as name, email, and a profile picture url.

The main issue with enabling this API (`even with pagination as defined in the spec`_) is that it would allow tools to scrape enrollments for all
students in a given course. Given the scale of some courses in edX.org, even if the API is made more performant with cursor pagination,
we're still left with an API pattern that would be actively encouraging clients out there to make hundreds of thousands of successive requests in order
to crawl enrollment data.

.. _`Names and Roles Provisioning Services (NRPS)`: http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0
.. _`even with pagination as defined in the spec`: http://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti-nrps/v2p0#limit-query-parameter

Proposed solutions
==================

Don't implement NRPS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Placeholder.

Implement NRPS gated by course
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Placeholder.

> Implement NRPS for courses up to a predefined number of students

Reviewer 2: This seems a good option to me. One suggestion I have is to use the NRPS spec (pagination) based API for courses up to a fixed number of students. And Implement the pre-calculation approach suggested by ``ormsbee`` for other courses.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Placeholder.

Implement NRPS limiting the context of the data retrieved
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Placeholder.

Consequences

> ============

Reviewer 3: Another option is to pre-calculate the enrollment data (say on a nightly basis) and make a giant file that we push up to S3 and redirect to with an authorized link. That would allow us to serve the data quickly, though it would mean that the data was stale. Also, there's a good chance that getting a single file with a million enrollments would choke any potential consumer... but it is an option.

Reviewer 2: We can actually pre-calculate multiple files in a scheduled task. And use those files as paginations. That will not decrease the number of requests, but requests will not do any db queries.

> Depends on choosen approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depends on chosen approach.
```
